.. _qserv-api-repl-worker:

Replication Worker Services
===========================

Scope
-----

This document describes the implementation of the Controller - Replication worker protocol based on HTTP/JSON.


TODO
----


Finish in a scope of the current ticket DM-42005 before the X-Mas break:

- [x] Think about the locking mechanism of the method WorkerHttpRequest::toJson(). The nethod
      acquires a lock on the mutext while the request may too have a lock on the same mutex
      while processing the request in WorkerHttpRequest::execute(). This may result in a deadlock.
      Perhaps no locking is needed as all since the resulting data are not lock sencitive?
- [x] Finish implementing a hierachy of the HTTP-based worker requests
- [x] Finish implementing the request processor for these requests
- [x] Add the new service to the Condfiguration and Registry to allow the Controller to send requests
      to the worker via HTTP
- [x] Display connection parameters of  the new service on the Web Dashboard
- [ ] Document the REST services in the documentation tree.
- [ ] Manually test the new implementation externally using ``curl`` or Python's ``requests`` module.
      Think about the test cases to cover the new implementation.
- [ ] Extend the integration tests to cover the new implementation. 

Finish in a scope of a separate ticket during/after the X-Mas break:

- [ ] Implement the MessengerHttp on the Controller side of the protocol. The class will
      be providing the multiplexing API for the Controller to send requests to the worker.
      The initial implementation will be based on the simple http::AsyncReq.
- [ ] Create a parallel hierarchy of the HTTP-based request & job classes on the Controller
      side of the protocol.
- [ ] Test the new classes.
- [ ] Implement the MessengerHttp to reuse the socket connections for sending multiple requests
      to the same worker.
- [ ] Test the new implementation to ensure it works the same way as the old one.
- [ ] Remove the old implementation of the Controller - Worker protocol.


Request categories
------------------

- Echo request
- Replica management
- Database management (SQL)
- Requests management
- Worker service management


General considerations
----------------------

Common attributes sent with all request types
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- ``instance_id``: <string>                 // The unique identifier of a Qserv instance served by the Replication System.
- ``version``: <string>                     // The version of the protocol used by the Controller.

Values  of these atributes are send in the request body for the ``POST`` and ``PUT`` requests.
For ``GET`` requests the values are sent in the URL.


Attributes in ``POST`` and ``PUT``` requests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- ``auth_key``: <string>                    // The authentication key to access the service.

A value of this attribute is sent in the request body for the ``POST`` and ``PUT`` requests.


Schema of the request object for all requests send as ``POST``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The request body is a JSON object with the following **required** fields:

.. code-block::

    {
        "id": <string>,                 // The unique ID of the request (generated by the Controller)

        // Optional request expiration timeout (for queued requests only) for disposing
        // requests regardless of their statuses. The timeout is expressed in
        // seconds. The default value of '0' means no expiration for a request.
        "timeout": <unsigned int>,      // [=0]

        // The optional priority level (for queued requests only) may affect a position of
        // a request relative to others in the input queue of the worker processor.
        // Requests with higher priority levels are placed close to the head
        // of the queue.
        "priority": <int>,              // [=0]

        "req": {
            ...
        }
    }

The first 3 attribiutes are captured in the C++ code into the following structure (defined in ``replica/proto/Protocol.h``):

.. code-block::c++

    struct QueuedRequestHdr {
        std::string id;
        int priority;
        unsigned int timeout;
        QueuedRequestHdr(std::string const& id_, int priority_, unsigned int timeout_)
                : id(id_), priority(priority_), timeout(timeout_) {}
        nlohmann::json toJson() const {
            return {{"id", id}, {"priority", priority}, {"timeout", timeout}};
        };
    };

The schema of the last attribute ``req`` is request-specific and is documented in the relevant sections below.

Schema of the response object for all but the service management and dispose requests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The schema applis to the following request types:

- Echo
- Create replica
- Delete replica
- Find replica
- Find all replicas
- Director index requests
- SQL requests
- Track request
- Get request status
- Stop request

All responses have the following schema:

.. code-block::

    {
        // The usual attributes returned by all REST services. Normally the "success" attribute is set to 1
        // once the input parameters of the request are parsed. Any request-specific errors are returned in
        // the "response" attribute of the JSON object.
        "success":   <number>,
        "error":     <string>,
        "error_ext": <object>,

        "req": <object>,                    // The original request object as it was received by the worker
        "type": <string>,                   // The type of the request

        "status":     <int>,                // The completion status of the operation. Values corresponds to protocol::Status
        "status_ext": <int>                 // Extended status of this operation. Values corresponds to protocol::StatusExt [=NONE]

        "expiration_timeout_sec": <uint32_t>,   // The effective expiration timeout of the request in seconds

        "performance": {
            "receive_time": <uint64_t>,     // When a request was received by a worker service
            "start_time":   <uint64_t>,     // When request execution started by a worker service
            "finish_time":  <uint64_t>      // When request execution finished by a worker service
        }
        "result": {
            ...
        }
    }

The payload of the ``result`` object depends on the type of the request. Also note that:

- The object is empty for all newely submitted requests that ended up in the processing queue.
- The object is filled with the relevant data for the requests that have been processed.


Response objects of the service management requests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
TBC...


Echo request
------------

The Controller sends a POST request to the Replication worker to test the functionality of the worker processor
and to simulate the request submittion/processing path. The ``echo`` request has no side effects, such as changes
to the worker databases. Parameters of the request will be evaluated by the service. If all looks
okay then the request will be queued for processing. Otherwise, the service will return an error.

.. code-block:

    POST /worker/echo

These are the the request-specific attributes:

.. code-block::

    {
        "req": {
            "delay" : <uint64_t>,   // The delay in milliseconds before the response is sent back
            "data" :  <string>      // The data to be echoed back  
        }
    }

Once the request is submitted and the worker service indicated that the request looked good, the state
of the request it can be further managed via:

- TODO: link to the request tracking service
- TODO: link to the replica status service
- TODO: link to the replica cancel service

The response object for the successfully completed request has the following attributes:

.. code-block::

    {
        "result": {
            "data" :  <string>      // The data that was echoed back
        }
    }


Replica management/information requests
---------------------------------------

All requests of this category are queued and processed by a dedicated pool of the worker threads.
Once the request is submitted and the worker service indicated that the request looked good, the state
of the request it can be further managed via:

- TODO: link to the request tracking service
- TODO: link to the replica status service
- TODO: link to the replica cancel service

Schemas of the response object for the successfully completed request varies depending on a type of a request.

Schemas for the single replica requests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The object has the following attributes:

.. code-block::

    {
        "result" : {
            "replica_info": {
                // enum ReplicaStatus {
                //    NOT_FOUND  = 0;
                //    CORRUPT    = 1;
                //    INCOMPLETE = 2;
                //    COMPLETE   = 3;
                // }
                "status": <string>,             // The status of the replica. Values corresponds to enums in class "ReplicaStatus"
                "worker": <string>,             // The worker ID
                "database": <string>,
                "chunk": <uint32_t>,

                // A collection of files
                //
                "file_info_many": [

                    {
                        "name": <string>,       // The name of a file
                        "size": <uint64_t>,     // Size in bytes
                        "cs": <string>,         // Control sum (if available)
                        "mtime": <uint32_t>,    // The file content modification time in seconds (since UNIX Epoch)
                    
                        // The following parameters are set in the relevant contexts only.
                        // Otherwise they'll be set to some default value.

                        "begin_transfer_time": <uint64_t>,  // When the file migration started (where applies) [=0]
                        "end_transfer_time": <uint64_t>,    // When the file migration finished (where applies) [=0]
                        "in_size": <uint64_t>               // The size of an input file (where applies) [=0]
                    },
                ],
                "verify_time": <uint64_t>       // When the replica status was verified by a worker
            }
        }
    }

Schemas for the multi-replica requests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

..  note::

    Presently, the only multi-replica request in tis category is the ``find-all`` request.

The response object has the following attributes:

.. code-block::

    {
        "result" : {
            "replica_info_many": [
                ...
            ]
        }
    }

Where each array entry is an object that has a single replica schema (``replica_info``) as described above for
the signle-replica requests.


Create a new chunk replica
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Controller sends a POST request to the Replication worker to initiate the replica replica creation
operation on the target worker. Parameters of the request will be evaluated by the service. If all looks
okay then the request will be queued for processing. Otherwise, the service will return an error.

.. code-block:

    POST /worker/replica/create

The request-specific attributes:

.. code-block::

    {
        "req": {
            "database":            <string>,
            "chunk":               <uint32_t>,
            "src_worker":          <string>,    // The source worker ID from where to pull the replica
            "src_worker_host":     <string>,    // The source worker host (DNS or IP)
            "src_worker_port":     <uint16_t>   // The source worker port    
        }
    }

Delete an existing chunk replica
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Controller sends a POST request to the Replication worker to initiate the replica deletion
operation on the target worker. Parameters of the request will be evaluated by the service. If all looks
okay then the request will be queued for processing. Otherwise, the service will return an error.

.. code-block:

    POST /worker/replica/delete

The request-specific attributes:

.. code-block::

    {
        "req": {
            "database" : <string>,
            "chunk" :    <uint32_t>
        }
    }

Find info an existing chunk replica
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Controller sends a POST request to the Replication worker to locate and report a status of a single chunk replica:

.. code-block:

    POST /worker/replica/find

The request-specific attributes:

.. code-block::

    {
        "req": {
            "database" :   <string>,
            "chunk" :      <uint32_t>,
            "compute_cs" : <int>        // Compute the control sum of the replica files if not 0
        }
    }

Find info on all existing chunk replicas if a database
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Controller sends a POST request to the Replication worker to locate and report a status of all chunk replicas
in a given database:

.. code-block:

    POST /worker/replica/find-all

The request-specific attributes:

.. code-block::

    {
        "req": {
            "database" : <string>
        }
    }

Database management (SQL) Requests
----------------------------------


Management requests
-------------------

Tracking requests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Controller sends a GET request to the Replication worker to track the status of the previously made
request and to retrieve results of the request if it's finished. The request URL should contain the unique
identifier ``id`` of the target request:

.. code-block:

    GET /worker/request/track/:id

In case of the successful request completion, the response object will not be empty and it will contain
the results of the request:

.. code-block::

    {
        "result": {
            ...
        }
    }

Retreiving request status
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Controller sends a GET request to the Replication worker to get the status of the previously made
request. The request URL should contain the ID of the unique
identifier ``id`` of the target request:

.. code-block:

    GET /worker/request/status/:id

Note, that unlike the ``track`` request, the ``status`` request does not return the results of the request.
The result object will be present but it will be empty:

.. code-block::

    {
        "result": {}
    }

Stopping/cancelling requests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Controller sends a PUT request to the Replication worker to stop the previously made request:

.. code-block:

    PUT /worker/request/stop/:id

There are no request-specific attributes in the request object.

Note, that unlike the ``track`` request, the ``stop`` request does not return the results of the request.
The result object will be present but it will be empty:

.. code-block::

    {
        "result": {}
    }

Disposing completed requests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There is a special request that's meant to be used by the Controller to dispose the completed
requests from the worker's internal storage. The request is sent as a POST request:

.. code-block:

    POST /worker/request/dispose

Where the request object is required to provide a collection (array) of the request IDs to be disposed:

.. code-block::

    {
        "req": {
            "ids": [
                <string>,
                ...
                <string>
            ]
        }
    }

The response object will have the completion status of the operation for each identifier mentioned in the request:

.. code-block::

    {
        "result": {
            "ids_disposed": {
                <string>: <int>,
                ...
                <string>: <int>
            }
        }
    }

Where the value of the integer is the completion status of the operation. The value of ``1`` means that the request
was disposed successfully. The value of ``0`` means that the request was not found in a collection of the completed
requests

Worker service management requests
----------------------------------

Requests in this category are meant to provide the Controller with the information on the worker service itself.
There are the following requests in this category:

- TODO: link to: Get the worker status
- TODO: link to: Get info on requests at various stages of processing
- TODO: link to: Suspend the worker service
- TODO: link to: Resume the worker service
- TODO: link to: Drain requests at the worker service
- TODO: link to: Reconfigure the worker service

The request-specific attributes are not required for these requests.

Response objects of all service management requests have the following schema:

.. code-block::

    {
        "status" :     <int>,    // The completion status of the operation. Values corresponds to protocol::Status
        "status_ext" : <int>,    // Extended status of this operation. Values corresponds to protocol::StatusExt [=NONE]

        "service_state" : <int>, // The state of the worker service as defined in protocol::ServiceState

        "num_new_requests" : <uint64_t>,
        "num_in_progress_requests" : <uint64_t>,
        "num_finished_requests" : <uint64_t>,

        "new_requests" : [
            ...
        ],
        "in_progress_requests" : [
            ...
        ],
        "finished_requests" : [
            ...
        ]
    }

.. note::

    The ``new_requests``, ``in_progress_requests``, and ``finished_requests`` are arrays of the request objects
    that are in the corresponding state. These collections will not be empty only for the following request types:

    - Get info on requests at various stages of processing
    - Drain requests at the worker service
    
    The schema of the request descriptors is the same as the schema of the corresponding original request objects.

Get the worker status
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Controller sends a GET request to the Replication worker to get the status of the worker service:

.. code-block:

    GET /worker/service/status

Get info on requests at various stages of processing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Controller sends a GET request to the Replication worker to get the information on the requests:

.. code-block:

    GET /worker/service/requests

Suspend the worker service
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Controller sends a PUT request to the Replication worker to suspend the worker service:

.. code-block:

    PUT /worker/service/suspend

Resume the worker service
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Drain requests at the worker service
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Controller sends a PUT request to the Replication worker to drain (stop) all requests in the worker service:

.. code-block:

    PUT /worker/service/drain

The operation affects requests that are already in the processing queue or requests that are still
in the input queue waiting to be procesed. The finished requests are not affected by this operation.


Reconfigure the worker service
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Controller sends a PUT request to the Replication worker to reconfigure the worker service:

.. code-block:

    PUT /worker/service/reconfig
